once around Varuna.
So discovered in the year 2000 by Robert
McMillan as part of the space watch
program which keeps an eye out for
dangerous falling objects, asteroids
that might collide with the Earth. But
it also as a result of photographing the
sky
gathers information about a whole lot of
other objects. So here's a photograph
here of the observatory at Kit Peak and
it was the year 2000. So the designation
is 2000 WR106.
Now it was lucky to find this one
because it was moving against a
particularly dense starfield in the
background which was making for a
difficult detection. And in fact, the
computer software was unable to pick up
this object moving against all those
myriad stars. And so McMillan actually
spotted it the old-fashioned way using
the blink comparison
technique where you alternate between
two images taken a few days apart to see
if anything appears to jump backwards
and forwards from one image to the
other.
Now, having discovered it, it was then
possible to track back through the
library of images, so-called pre-covery
process, and find it all the way back to
the Paloma images of 1954.
So, you get nearly 50 years worth of
orbital arc, and that allows an
excellent approach to uh pinning down
its orbit. The name Varuna from a Hindu
god who ruled the sky seems quite
appropriate. And it was given the minor
planet number 20,000 to commemorate the
200th anniversary of the first minor
planet to be discovered uh the dwarf
planet series.
It's located in the Kiper belt out
beyond Neptune in a near circular orbit
taking 279 years approximately 40 to 45
astronomical units from the sun and with
a small but significant tilt of 17°.
though similar tilt to that of Pluto,
but its orbit is more circular and
certainly keeps it well away from
Neptune, at least 12 AU at all times.
Quite faint. Another factor that made it
difficult to pin down, magnitude 20. So
that's several orders of magnitude less
than uh many objects that we uh talk
about in these talks. And this in fact
is the best Hubble Space Telescope image
so far. It's uh really quite a
challenging object.
650 to 700 km in diameter. That's uh
120th of the mass of Pluto. And that
seems very low density. It's under the
density of water, less than 1 g per
cubic cm. suggesting that these quipper
belt objects as this is a fairly common
factor between them are porous rather
than fully compacted. The low mass tends
to have a problem squeezing all of the
voids out of the body. Just 43 Kelvin
very near absolute zero at very low
temperature and somewhat elliptical in
shape. uh the light curve reveals it's
spinning in 6 hours which is quite fast
um although not unheard of for covelt
objects and that gives it this
ellipsoidal shape with a length to width
ratio of 1.6 there. So probably looks a
little bit like this. This is an
artist's impression. Of course we just
don't have any really good images yet.
The light does show a dark color with
some red. just 13% of the light comes
back an albido as they call it of 0.13
and that's nearly as dark as our moon
which is actually always black at just
around about 11% I think and the slight
red tinge as with most of these copelt
objects are these tholins these carbon
hydrogen nitrogen oxygen polymers that
uh are somewhat irregular in in
structure and a complete mixture made by
exotic chemical reactions caused by the
low temperature and the excitation of
the organic molecules like methane um
nitrogen, carbon monoxide, water
mixtures that tend to get polymerized
when they get hit by radiation. So
cosmic rays are a main source of this.
Um there is some spectral evidence for
water ice and that tends to suggest this
is a young surface again because it's
probably freshly exposed material but
we're not quite sure in this case.
No sign of a companion. So the picture
on the right is entirely fanciful. An
analysis of the light curve though
suggests there might just be one. It's
tentative
12-hour orbit somewhere in the 1,200 to
2,000 kilometer distance range, but so
far not even the Hubble Space Telescope
has managed to pick this up. It's just a
hint of a pattern in the light curve
that might be the moon appearing and
disappearing into eclipse.
So, this is another of these Kiper belt
objects that seems to spin rapidly and
that um suggests an origin with its moon
as well in a collision. And as I've said
in my other Kiper belt videos,
collisions were thought to be rare. But
it seems that every object we look at
has moons and moonlets around it, if not
rings, and shows fresh surfaces, which
suggest that uh there has been a heating
event recently because these small
objects at such deep in the deep freeze
of the Kiper belt really should have
cooled down by now unless something
stirred them up in the recent past. So,
it's quite an interesting challenge. And
of course uh the original theories were
that the coer belt was much more dense
in the early solar system in the first
100 million years uh but is now too
dense uh sorry too sparse in uh objects
for collisions to be likely at all due
to the outwards migration of Neptune
caused by interactions between the four
giant planets as things settled down in
that formative period of the solar
system, but uh doesn't seem to quite
stack up. There seem to have been many
more collisions, and they must have been
recent, otherwise no fresh material, no
current ring systems, and certainly no
warmth inside the bodies of these koer
belt objects. So, thank you very much
for listening, and I hope you've enjoyed
that short video about the mysteries of
the outer solar system. Thanks very
much.